FlockFlock - file access policy enforcement
by Jonathan Zdziarski 

This project is currently UNDER DEVELOPMENT and ALPHA VERSION.

USE AT YOUR OWN RISK!

NOTE: I have applied for a kext signing certificate from Apple. Without 
one, FlockFlock only works with SIP's kext checking turned off on the 
host machine, therefore FlockFlock should be used only for testing until 
Apple provides a cert.

WHY FLOCKFLOCK EXISTS

One of the worst parts about being compromised is not knowing you're 
compromised, and having your data stolen by spyware, or hijacked by
ransomware, only to find out about it too late. Most security researchers 
aren't even 100% positive that their system hasn't been compromised. 
Between spyware, ransomware, trojanized or misbehaving applications,
nation state hacking, and other threats, simply relying on file 
permissions and a secure execution environment no longer cuts it. FlockFlock
fills the need for a solution that can keep your personal data protected 
from potentially malicious software that has rooted your system, or to 
monitor applications that you have to have installed, but don't 
necessarily trust.

WHAT IS FLOCKFLOCK?

In Simple Terms:

FlockFlock is a utility to help protect your personal files in macOS,
to be able to tell if your system has been compromised, to ensure your
applications are respecting your privacy, and to defend your personal data 
against ransomware, spyware, infection, and other threats by preventing 
unauthorized processes (even by super user processes) from being able to 
open, read, or destroy your personal files without your explicit permission.

In short, FlockFlock is like the popular "Little Snitch" program, but for
file access instead of network connections. It integrates with the
operating system on a low level, and has capabilities higher than root.

For Developers:

FlockFlock is a programmable macOS kernel extension that enforces file 
access and modification policies using macOS's kernel-level MAC 
(mandatory access control) framework.  The MAC framework began in 
TrustedBSD and was later adopted into the Darwin kernel; it allows 
FlockFlock to intercept every file open/write/delete/rename call on
the system and analyze it against a set of rules programmed into the kernel
at boot time. Even if an attacker gets root on your system, the kernel
module continues to enforce the user's rules, and even attempts to persist
FlockFlock from being unloaded, deleted, or its helper daemon killed.

FlockFlock comes in three pieces: the kernel extension, which contains a 
live copy of all active rules (so that a rooted device should not be able to
disable it), a helper daemon that programs it at boot time and prompts the
user for new access entitlements, and a user space client, which provides
basic status via a status bar menu, and a way to disable FlockFlock from
the GUI for upgrades. Per-user rules are stored, and can be edited (with
the proper access entitlements) by the user.

FlockFlock is also open source, because there is such a lack of good
driver and kernel code for Mac. I think you'll find FlockFlock to be
very useful in developing your own kernel-mode drivers. FlockFlock is an
IOKit based driver, and the source code should help you understand
complex concepts such as mach messages, user-space client communication,
driver contruction, memory and locking, and much more. Enjoy the knowledge!

WHY THE STUPID NAME?

It's a play on words with the old unix "flock" style advisory locking
combined with a hat tip to Patrick Wardle, author of BlockBlock, which
is a different type of system integrity protection tool you should also
be using.

NOTE: FlockFlock's locking is much more advanced than the flocks of olde,
    it's just a play on words, and does not rely on (or use) flocks.

FEATURES

- Real-time, kernel-level protection against unauthorized access to files
- Defend against ransomware, spyware, trojanized applications, or other 
      malicious programs that might attempt to steal, encrypt, or destroy
      your personal files
- Monitor applications to ensure they aren’t misbehaving, and are
  respecting your personal privacy in accessing your data files.
- A user-friendly interface to add new rules and receive notifications of
  unauthorized access attempts.
- Persistence; protects itself against root processes from unloading
  the kernel extension, tampering with core files, or manipulating the
  user's rules.
      * This feature has been disabled in alpha versions for testing

INSTALLATION

NOTE: Until Apple provides me with a kext signing certificate, you 
will have to disable SIP's kext checks in order to use FlockFlock, but
can leave the rest of SIP on. This slightly compromises the security of 
macOS, so I only recommend using FlockFlock for testing until Apple cuts a 
kext signing cert for me. 

Reboot your computer into "Recovery Mode" by rebooting and holding in
Command-R after the chime, until it boots to the recovery partition.
Start a Terminal (Utilities->Terminal) and type:

    csrutil enable --without kext; reboot

After your system reboots, double click the FlockFlock.pkg file and follow 
the installation process. A reboot is recommended after installation, but 
not required.

FIRST RUN

When the system comes back up, FlockFlock should be active on your
system, and you should start being prompted to grant file access
permissions to various programs you might run.

When first running your favorite applications for the first time,
you'll be prompted to allow or deny access to specific files or folders.
This allows you to set up initial access rules. FlockFlock will remember
your choices so it won't bother you again, unless you check the box
"Forget after Restart".

RULES EDITING

For manual rules editing, edit the .flockflockrc file in your home
directory. You will need to reboot in order for the changes to take effect,
since they are programmed directly into the kernel.

REMOVAL 

Disable FlockFlock from the status bar, and then run the uninstall.sh 
script provided, then reboot.

PERSISTENCE 

FlockFlock's kernel module prevents deletion or overwriting of core files. 
Any attempt to unload the kernel extension, except through recovery mode, 
will cause a kernel panic and subsequent reboot. Its data files and core 
files are protected from modification, and its processes are protected 
from being killed. The goal of FlockFlock's persistence routines are to
provide a protected execution environment for FlockFlock to the point
where one would need to gain kernel-level code execution to disable it,
and malware that can gain kernel privileges would need to attack FlockFlock.
At that point,  you've got bigger problems... but it certainly does up the
ante for malware.

The user interface has a convenient menu option to disable FlockFlock so
that it can be removed or upgraded without booting into recovery mode. This
requires user interaction, providing a reasonable compromise between
security and usability.

NOTE: Persistence is disabled for alpha versions, except for specific
    builds labeled "persistence"; however, these builds will still allow
    the kernel module to be unloaded in the event of a problem. It will,
    however notify the user.

DISABLING PERSISTENCE

To disable persistence, allowing for upgrades or removal, simply select
"Disable FlockFlock" from the FlockFlock status bar menu. This is the
preferred way to disable it, and allows for easy upgrades.

As always is the case with alpha/beta software, things can go wrong, so
I've left the ability to unload the kernel module open in all alpha
persistence builds, so you won't have to go into recovery mode (usually)
to remove or change the software is something goes wrong. If you find
things are bogging down or experiencing other problems, and you can't
get to the FlockFlock menu to disable it, you can do the following:

sudo kextunload /Library/Extensions/FlockFlock.kext
launchctl unload /Library/LaunchAgents/com.zdziarski.FlockFlockUserAgent.plist
sudo launchctl unload /Library/LaunchDaemons/com.zdziarski.FlockFlockDaemon.plist
sudo kextunload /Library/Extensions/FlockFlock.kext

You'll unload the kext twice, once to disengage the operational hooks,
and a second time to disengage persistence after you've shut down the
daemon and agent. The first will give you an error that it can't unload
the kext, because of the agents, however it will have stopped the
operational part of the code.

If all else fails, use recovery mode to delete the kext from
/Library/Extensions/FlockFlock.kext. I don't expect even an alpha should
ever come to that, though.

COMPATIBILITY

Tested With:
    El Capitan
    Sierra Beta 4

    NOTE: THIS SOFTWARE IS ALPHA SOFTWARE AND MAY HAVE BUGS

KNOWN BUGS

- Please send me bug reports

FUTURE PLANS
- Implement a rules editing tool in user-space and give it exclusive
  editing capabilities (to avoid having to boot into recovery mode)
- Implement activity logging
- Richer popup screen to support more configurations
- A simple mode for novice users

FAQ

- What does this protect?
  The default ruleset protects files in /Users only, although this can
  be changed. If FlockFlock tried to block on every file acccess in the
  system, everything would come to a screeching halt. 

- Does this impact performance?
  When an application attempts to access a protected file, FlockFlock
  performs a policy lookup. The lookup is generally fast, and should not
  impact performance except possibly on extremely busy systems that are
  opening a lot of files in the background.

- Where performance is impacted is the quarantine during a user prompt.
  If FlockFlock decides the user must approve the file access, then the
  program is blocked on the file access until the user responds. This, 
  obviously, is the behavior you want, but if you let the prompt sit there
  forever, you'll end up getting a backlog of prompts to answer, which can
  become a bottleneck for you. It could possibly also make some programs
  malfunction, such as those that are waiting for a file to open and let
  a network connection time out due to being blocked.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Patrick Wardle for providing some initial code to peruse on the
MAC framework and his blog posts on pid task tracking.

CHANGELOG

0.0.1	Initial alpha release
0.0.2   Temporarily disable persistence mechanisms for alpha testing
        Break lock if driver disconnects
        Truncated /Application apps to their .app container
        Resolved issued with duplicate queries
        Reduced the sleep time between waiting for policy lock
        Re-checked policy list before sending blocked queries
0.0.3   Added radio buttons for choosing "Once", "Until Restart",
        and "Forever"
0.0.4   Fixed issues with OSDictionary, replaced with custom structure
0.0.5	Implemented KAuth to replace vnode_check_exec hooks
        Added process hierarchy (e.g. "/bin/sh via Xcode")
        Improvements to locking and memory allocation
        Significant code cleanup
        Added keychain files to default ruleset, as many apps use it
        Other various improvements
        Hopefully added (some) stability for Sierra
0.0.6	Added MAC hooking to detect and associate posix spawned procs
        Cleanup temporary tables in memory
        Added "Until Quit" option, made the default
        Added application icon to user prompt
0.0.7	Fixed a crash in the user agent when adding "Any Files"
	Stability improvements for Sierra 
0.0.8	Fixed a bug that led to a kernel panic
0.0.9 	Manicured display names for the user
	Improvements to finding the application path icon
	Fixed a bug that caused a crash in the user agent
	Incorporated master userspace/kernel security protocol
	Fixed a bug causing ~/Library/LaunchAgents to not get creaetd
0.0.10 	Don't blow up the agent on unicode filenames
	Rolled agent into an app with status bar icon for enable/disable
0.0.11  Fixed packaging issues and macOS relocation, etc
        Made small change to help hide agent from dock better
        Nicer icon for the status bar
0.0.12	Treat /Library/Application Support/FlockFlock/.flockflockrc as a
	    a system-wide configuration file, append to ~/.flockflockrc
	Support $HOME in rules for current home directory
	Deny driver connection attempts by root (userland only)
	Don't start filter until initial programming is complete
0.0.13	Fixed a bug causing certain background tasks to not be tracked
0.0.14  Cleanup from 0.0.13 and ppid full path tracking
0.0.15 	Various tweaks
0.0.16  Completely reworked process tracking and it's awesome 
0.0.17  Further improvements to process tracking
0.0.18  Added persistence hook for mpo_vnode_check_rename
        In addition to read access, added write access protection for
            all protected files; apps can work with files they've created,
            but cannot modify protected files without user consent
	Code cleanup and commenting
	Removed significant logging overhead
0.0.19  Added FlockFlockDaemon, moved load-time and policy code into it
        Tweaks to persistence
0.0.20  More improvements to persistence and stability
	Fixed some locking issues in persistence mode
0.0.21  Put kauth loop into a separate thread to get path before check_oper
0.0.22  Improved spawn tracking, trimmed display name of .app packages 
	Turned off heavy debug logging for performance
0.0.23  Fixed issues with freezing due to not recognizing daemon as friendly
0.0.24  Added missing persistence hook mpo_vnode_check_rename_to 
0.0.25* Changed "allow!" rule to "watch" to indicate a watched folder
	Added support for separation of operations (read, write create)
	Added file operations (rwc) to .flockflockrc
	NOTE: UI still grants either all or none to make it easy for user
